okay okay one second
okay I'm going to call to order a
special meeting of the board of
Selectmen Tuesday September
3D uh 2024 uh we're convenient at
706 um the first order of business is uh
the Pledge of
Allegiance I pledge allegiance to the
flag of the United States of America and
to the Republic for which it stands one
nation under God indivisible with
liberty and justice for all right thank
you um public speak uh we're going to
move on to Linda
fish no thanks okay all right um so the
the purpose of this meeting uh item
three is to discuss and act upon
questions for the ballot um Dennis uh
has done a tremendous amount of work on
these and uh to make them as uh
easy to understand and have someone have
the ability to read them in The Ballot
Box I think they've gotten much better
so um has everyone had an opportunity to
see the most recent one Ann and Scott
yes the one that just came six how
recent was that 6:30 basically oh no I
have not seen anything that
recently okay well let's
I'm not getting
emails I've talked to Carol and she had
sent an email and I never got it today
I'm not getting emails okay so uh Ann is
there a personal account that I can um
uh can you text me the account you want
it to go to so then broadcasting
it um let's see
here and it was only the change Scott
that was the last question split to two
uh question 14 was split into two
13 are you going to send it to me also
sure I'll do it yeah I did not get it
either
Jeff I didn't send it to you
Eric you have it I didn't know you would
be here I'm I'm so sorry I didn't send
it to you I I sent it to an at her uh
her Andover address the only one I have
I also sent it to you Scott at your uh
personal address what I did was uh I got
I got back from I was at norch hospital
today and I got back and um noticed an
email I got from uh Jeff Murray saying
that he agreed with all the questions
except for question 13 he thought it was
uh that he put it a word salad so I
tried to make the only the best way to
not have it be a word salad was to break
it into two questions which is what we
had done with other items just to make
them more simple and so um I I sent I
believe Scott I sent it to you uh your
the latest version you got should have
come around 6:30 and it should uh be a
total of 15 questions instead of
14 and I'm gonna put him up on the
screen anyway I think that would be the
best oh yeah
um so let me I did text you my email but
and I sent it so put up everybody can
just confirm that they got it while I do
this next step that I'm going to deal
with yep I got it okay and so I got it
to I'm printing it right
now okay I just got
it Jeff uh if I may before we begin I
wanted to say a few words about um the
context of this
exercise yeah if I if I may of course we
we are on um August 12th uh the board of
Selectmen voted to approve the uh the
final report of the of the committee of
of the charter committee and the board
of selectman and um the timeline is such
that we we have to submit we have we
have to do this by the by Thursday okay
this is this is the deadline is February
5th I'm sorry a uh September 5th so we
are running up against the deadline and
we we we really should get this done the
other thing I want to say is that if
these questions are seem to be and I've
worked on making them more simplified
too simple although one of the one of
the ways to make them more simple was to
break them into several you know more
questions uh there is there is an
opportunity and I'm going to bring it up
to the selectman's meeting the regular
meeting next week an opportunity for the
select to vote to have um explanatory
comments official explanatory comments
from the town made to explain the uh the
issues more uh precisely say than these
questions do I think in some you won you
won't need it but for some you might but
anyway that that's that's common
practice and the way that works is it's
under a general statutes 9-
369b it's it's done commonly what what
what happen happens is the board of
selectman votes to refer the matter to
the town clerk so which would be of
course Carol Le and she is responsible
for preparing explanatory comments which
are not argumentative in other words
they don't they don't make any points at
all in favor or against any of these any
of these items they just state facts
they just explain the details of what is
changing right of what is changing and
what what isn't what isn't maybe in the
okay I mean I I think the questions are
pretty uh self-explanatory for the most
part but some of them I I am sure that
we should do that
um I just know that before you go over
the questions so you can you know say
don't worry if they're not you don't
think they're detailed enough because we
can detail them through the explanatory
comments that uh actually have to be you
have to approve doing it next week and
then uh there's no deadline before it
but it's time to get on with it you you
would have to approve at the board of
selectman and then it goes to Carol and
Carol prepares the draft and then it
goes to me for final approval so I'm G
to I'm going to prepare a resolution uh
for you to put on um the agenda for next
week's meeting that shouldn't take but
five minutes okay that's all I I want to
say that because I want to make sure
that everybody knows that there can
these these questions can be explained
in more detail in ways that are not
argumentative in FA either in favor or
against just by stating additional facts
and I don't think it has to be done with
every question my own opinion that's
all my only concern with that Dennis and
correct me if I'm wrong but we're
already
into um this is going to be a two-sided
ballot yeah because we're asking 15
questions correct if you're trying to
put explanatory text on the ballot at
the same time no does doesn't go on the
ballot it's it's it's in a separate
format and it's it's distributed by the
clerk uh in actually in whatever means
she thinks is best calculated to get the
word out and on top of that she's she's
authorized to prepare uh like posters
for the for the for the voting place
that you know include those explanatory
comments
so no it doesn't does not go on the
ballot that's a great question though
Eric got it okay then that's that was my
only concern with doing that Eric Eric
as a question um how do I share my
screen as the
host uh down if you run your cursor down
near the bottom yeah I see you see a
green arrow that says share
yeah you click that then it gets me to
open system
settings I don't really want
to I don't know
um
I I don't know it should come up with
something that just says
share okay uh Eric can you uh no forget
it I got it it worked you have the power
I know I like
it
sorry you're not seeing that are you
yes okay let me I see it I see it
okay so
this these are the questions as
currently written so I think um and Ann
and Scott please please let me know if
uh if I read the questions if we have if
we have issues on any of the individual
questions let's let's stop talk to
dentist say okay this is a problem what
what can we do what can't we do I'd like
to get through these and sit there and
and move this if we can so um so
question one um shall the town Charter
be revised to require regular Town
elections in in November of odd numbered
years instead of in
May any issues on that question no okay
two shall the town Charter be revised to
delete the rule that the resignation of
any member of any board or similar body
be accepted by the board of
Selectmen okay if you guys don't say
anything to me I'm just going to keep
going like that question is good okay
three shall the town Charter be revised
to require that any Charter revision
commission established after a mandatory
Board of Selectmen review be giving at
least six months to submit their draft
report to the
board question
four shall the town Charter be revised
to permit the director of health or
animal control officer position to be
filled by an entity as well as an
individual
person question five that means that
that one is referring to where you could
have another town help out with that is
that we um what it what it's referencing
in is the charter had called for an
employeed position employee and they
might be subcontractors just just like
we're doing currently with the animal
control and yeah that's what I thought
okay good all right um question
five shall the town
Charter be revised so that starting in
November of
2027 instead of being elected the town
clerk will be appointed by the board of
Selectmen
okay uh question seven
uh no I'm sorry question six
shall the town Charter be revised to
begin the town budget process sooner and
to set earlier deadlines for budget
proposal submissions by Town
departments so can I ask a legal
question sure what happens if seven
passes but not six
Den seven passes and not
six and uh you'll have to uh everybody
will has to Huff hustle up a little bit
more even without the mandatory
deadlines to try to get everything ready
for the annual Town budget meeting in
the second week of April instead of in
May but what happens what Eric is saying
is what if one of them doesn't pass and
one of them passes I mean and Eric the
reality is you're going to do what is
required so if the earlier budget
process doesn't happen and it still ends
up in May you're going to set the
deadlines
accordingly okay you can you can always
do them earlier we're just GNA use
common sense if something doesn't pass
we'll sit there and modify the actual
application and then if something passes
that shouldn't have will either try to
pass it again in the next budget
revision or remove it in the next budget
revision budget Charter revision I'm
sorry I guess I have kind of a bigger
question than that is that these are
generalized questions yet you've
approved very specific mod modifications
text and what I see what I think is that
there's not necessarily A onetoone
correspondence
like some changes in text are affected
by two numbers at once so is that whole
section kind of null and void can you go
back and make just some of the changes
Dennis the changes are in the dra in the
final report of the commission and the
board of selectman what the the the
trick to to doing this Eric is to make
sure that the questions cover all of the
changes that have been made by the uh
selectman and the Commission in the
charter that that's contained in the the
document that includes the the changes
at large within the context of the
charter so um you know whatever uh
that's a matter for
interpretation but uh when when I draft
these questions with with Jeff's a big
help from Jeff and from Carol I uh I
have that in mind
try I mean Eric I totally understand
understand what you're saying is one of
these questions can pass and it relates
to another question so does that
eliminate both those issues from moving
forward in the new Charter no the
they're individual questions understood
understood but ER What er what Eric is
saying though Dennis is that especially
with the budget
timing
if
if the timing of the budget passes Eric
and let's sit there and say the Quorum
issue of the budget doesn't then we we
we have an earlier Town budget
meeting right I mean Dennis that's the
truth right I'm not I mean what happens
wait a minute here here I gotta I gotta
do this Eric Eric I gotta do this
because I don't want to waste I don't
want to waste let's through the
questions let's go through the questions
and then we'll go back and we'll we'll
Circle all of the questions that relate
to each other and sit there and see what
would happen if one failed and the other
passed frankly in past chter revisions
that I've worked on I don't think I've
ever done more and I've done them in
Mansfield and also in about five or six
of them in Windom I have never ever ever
gone past seven or eight questions no
matter how detailed it is but I got uh a
message I got messages from several
people that these questions are to be
more um
simplified and I I if if I were left to
my own devices at one time I have seen
the light though I agree I like this I
like I like the result a lot but I used
to uh you know I'm used to doing app
pellet work in courts and you write
questions that will take up a whole page
okay that's an art that's an art okay
but but but to do that
here the one item that could have could
have resulted in a long run on question
would be Eric this new budget process
that could have been all set up in one
question where it's all dependent on one
question passing so you either do it all
or you do none of it but my my view
continues to be that uh for one thing
I'm confident and this is probably not
relevant but I'm going to say it I'm
confident that this these questions will
pass I don't see them fail failing one
failing one and
one uh uh one passing I also I also
think what I said before and what Jeff
said is that if the requirement that you
have an earlier uh annual Town budget
meeting and that may be written in more
may do this or may do that in the draft
report I'm going to take a look at it
when we get back to discussing this in
more detail I'm not sure it's mandatory
but I think the effort is going to be
made to hold the annual Town budget
meeting in the second week of April
instead of in May that's pretty that's
pretty solid that's a pretty that's a
pretty mandatory thing so I I I guess I
guess I'm I was talking about something
else but in terms of that but anyway let
me let me go through the rest of the
questions and then we will come back to
ER is talking s there's certain
questions that do relate to each other
and I would also like to know what would
happen if one pass and one failed y okay
so
um so we were on I'm going to go to
question I read question six and no one
had any issues with that and Eric asked
this question okay let's go ahead I just
have one question to do with a whole
bunch of these budget things because I
noticed one of the things in the charter
revision thing was that the budget
review meetings would be joint meetings
from the board of Selectmen and the
board of Finance that's not in any of
these questions
here question there was there was an
initial
meeting that and and if I remember that
correctly even our current budget
meeting is a joint meeting and that this
says there'll be joint budget review
meetings in
March meetings
plural well and section D to be really
honest even even if we even if that is
said and even if that is how it's
written um the Board of Selectmen don't
really need to attend those because we
don't have control over those items we
can attend and some of us have attended
previous meetings but
um I don't really consider that as
a okay because this year I know we had
like four budget meetings for the board
of Selectmen then we sent it over to the
board of finance and they had all their
meetings yeah and the an not going to do
that okay the anticipation is I'm
hopeful that this year the board of
Selectmen does less meetings
on the board the budget and
okay um anyway let let's go to question
seven question seven shall the charter
shall the town Charter be revised to
hold the annual Town budget meeting in
the second week of April instead of
May
okay question eight shall the town
Charter be revised to eliminate the
Forum requirement for the annual Town
budget meeting but not for any special
town
meeting question nine shall the town
Charter be revised so that the budget
passed at by the annual town meeting may
go right to referendum held on the same
day as the Region 8
vote um
we should add Dennis in there the Region
8 budget
vote um just for clarification I I was
trying to keep it to two lines but I'll
add that yeah ah you know I'm trying to
be economical it because it is
long but yeah
okay my question about number nine it
says the budget passed by the annual
town meeting I thought there wasn't
going to be a vote at that meeting no
there will be a vote of the board
oh no of the annual Town budget meeting
they can vote they can vote to lower it
or they can vote to approve it they can
lower it and approve it but but they've
got to from what I read of the charter
they've got to come out of that that
meeting with a budget it's there's no
rejecting the budget at that meeting
there's either lowering it or or not
they can lower it they can't raise
it there's going to be a result and that
and that's the whole purpose of this
this this whole set of questions is to
get the
referendum and this may not be a wor
that worthy a goal to for all this you
know I didn't write these these I when
when Charter revision was being
developed I usually play a more of a
role than I did because I had a I had a
death in the family during that period
And I didn't I did not have anything to
do with
writing this part of the Charter that
was done by the commission I'm sure Jeff
did but um I think the major goal was to
try to get it done earlier so that you
would go to referendum at the same time
as Region 8 if you could it's not if you
don't it's not a sin or anything or a
crime but uh the effort was to be made
to have it on the same day I think I
don't live in town I don't know as much
as you all do about how things actually
work in practice I know a little bit but
but I but I do know that um you know
there there seemed to be a it seemed to
be felt that it was a big advantage to
have those referendums held on the same
day if possible yeah we just didn't okay
the charter revision commission and the
discussions at those meetings was have
it all on the same day so we only have
one One initial budget referendum and
hopefully everything passes and we only
have to ask the voters to go to the
polls once not not twice because hardly
anyone would go to the ram meeting and
then you'd get more people at the Town
budget vote so let's combine them get as
many people as we can to go and vote on
both of them so that we get the most
participation so that was what this was
about and remember now you okay okay
okay okay okay but I just talk let's
just talk about the questions like
really I just want the questions either
approved or not or adjustments that need
to be made to the question so if we can
put in the Region 8 budget vote and I
know it'll drop it to another line but
that one word will at
least I might cut another word out and
you know you never know okay you never
know question 10 careful editor sell the
town Charter be revised to provide the
authority to pass ordinances to the
board of Selectmen while authorizing
voters to petition to referendum and
repeal any ordinance passed by the board
before before it could become
effective that's totally accurate okay
yeah if I do say so myself okay so I'm
just I'm just making sure my other
members are all good
and no additional much better than the
old question much better than the for
list I had from you all have driven to
exceed myself okay um okay question
11 shall the time Town Charter be
revised to increase the minimum dollar
amount to require special town meeting
approval for bonding or other forms of
financing to a figure exceeding
$50,000 for any rep repayment term of
more than one
year okay can I ask another dumb
question on that one sure so is that
any bond or financing that that costs
more than 50,000 a year or 50,000 total
50,000 total 50,000 plus one one one
cent if it exceeds 50,000 and the
repayment terms are for more than one
year but but understand just for the
rest of the board of Select members
these would normally be
in in the budget
document this would be Eric this would
be Eric if you went out and you wanted
to do something different something you
want to be get a copier and it cost
under
[Music]
$50,000 and you had a budget line item
that you had the money in it you could
do
it sure when's the last time you guys
bonded anything never never we don't do
we don't don't bond we don't we haven't
B we Bond all the time in window well
you do but we don't but our number our
number was very low and but that would
be the information
in the document that you were talking
about before which we'll talk about
after we get through these questions
12 shall the town Charter be revised to
increase the minimum
amount yes sorry it is the different
question shall the town Charter be reved
to increase the minimum amount to
require special town meeting approval
for any Grant of financial aid from any
source to to a grant that requires the
town to provide a local match of $25,000
or
more
okay uh question 13 so these are the two
questions that were split on this last
go round question
13 shall shall the town Charter be
revised to increase the minimum amount
requiring special town meeting approval
to any proposed supplemental
appropriation of
1% or more of the current Town
budget
and okay so we'll go to the next one
question
14 shall the town Charter be revised to
provide that any proposed supplemental
appropriation that exceeds
2.5% of the current Town budget or
$200,000 whichever is greater must be
sent directly to a referendum
vote okay and question
15 shall the town Charter be revised to
delete transaction sections 1012
1013 and
10:14 which shall be recorded in the
office of the town clerk for
reference
okay so if we don't have any questions
related to the um well any issues with
the questions let's talk
about items that are joined like Eric
was talking
about so question one is not joined
question two is not joined question
three is not joined question four is not
does not have any other related Parts
question five does not have any other
related Parts um well yeah it doesn't so
we're really talking about question six
question
seven question eight and question
nine right
[Music]
um so if question
six if question six doesn't pass and
everything else passed we would still
force all the Departments to do their
budgets earlier because we need to hit
the de um and so question six is really
just a
a an organizational part part of the
charter and if if if
question
seven or question eight or question nine
fail then Eric I would assume we would
push back the deadlines to allow them to
have a little bit more time because the
residents didn't want to have one
referendum they wanted to have two
referendums so and that that's what
would happen so 678 and nine all kind of
go together and they'll all have a
different impact if any of them if they
all don't go in the same
direction and Dennis if if that occurs
if something happens where one six or
seven like six8 n pass and seven doesen
um what do we
do well you try to meet the goals of the
others without uh you know there there
may be some wiggle room
like you uh seem to say before with uh
with the uh the F with with six and uh
you know you try to do it it's just it's
not if you can't do it you can't do it
but what what one thing as I was going
to say before one thing this does do is
remember that in
2022 you passed or the town passed a
very noteworthy provision that provides
that if a budget
fails once that it goes to uh it it
becomes split into education and and um
Town something that I personally do not
like frankly I shouldn't even say that
but I I'm sorry we have it in Windom and
I don't like it and uh but here uh I
believe that it's said until now that I
may be wrong but I thought it said that
having oh oh oh I know the budget is
rejected at the town
meeting that Pro that will go to h a
second or you go to a split referendum a
split budget after that too I'm pretty
sure that's what it says this wa wait
wait wait wait wait that's not true it
it is it is it gets bifurcated and Scott
you were on that committee so please
just say if it gets bifurcated it's at
referendum that it fails I I'm gonna
look and then after possibility that I
could be wrong after the first
referendum where the combined budget
fails it then goes and does it
separately but who cares the point is
the point is to not have it fail to pass
it all at once so we don't have these
conflicts the question ends up still
being and this is just something that we
as a board are going to have to use
common sense on question six seven eight
and
nine all all relate to the same basic
budgetary
issue and if one of them fails we're
going to have to work together to
determine what the the outcome of that
vote makes us do with the budget process
because honestly I sit there and go if
if question eight
fails
[Music]
um if question 8 fails you are going to
have problems with meeting the regional
vote meeting the deadline of the
regional vote because Dennis what that
would do is that would push our budget
process back to um there'd be a town
there would be a vote uh down because
the way the charter currently works if
it's voted down if the budget fails at
the town
meeting it pushes it back to the board
of finance and they have a week that's
right you know we have to I think it's
they have a week and then we have to
meet again we have to have another town
meeting I just looked two weeks later so
we'll never meet the ram budget Dae
you'll never get it never do and so we
as a board are going to have to
understand if these questions don't all
pass we're going to have to make some
decisions and say okay this is what the
outcome of that boat vote leads us down
and this is how we're going to sit there
and implement the
charter it's just just how it is there's
nothing else we can do and we're going
to do it to the best of our ability but
six Eric is correct six seven eight and
and nine all relate and they do and one
fail on any of the questions will cause
problems with the other questions um not
not problems that can't be uh addressed
through as you say Common Sense Common
Sense yeah I think I think I think that
the benefit is that you're not going to
go back from the town you're not you're
going to go to town meeting and you're
not going back that town meeting is
going to end with a referendum correct
that's the goal that that's the goal
that's the goal gotta vote we got to
have favorable vote but if not 6 seven8
n all relate to the same issue and we're
going to address that as a board a 10 is
a separate Issue 11 is a separate
issue
um 12 is a separate
Issue
13 is a special is a separate issue
right 14 is a separate issue oh it is
yes right and 15
y so there are two specific questions so
if if somebody and 13 and 14
are relate to the same thing but if
something gets voted down like if 13 got
voted down or asking for 1% of the
current budget it's currently a half a
percent. so we would just go back to a
half a percent correct if 14 passed that
would be fine we'd have to have a
special meeting over half of half of 1%
but if it exceeded $200,000 we would go
right to referendum so they're separate
questions so the the only issue we as a
board
have are six seven8 and
nine
um not all going in the same direction
of v and then we have to address that
after the
election see how see how it works yeah
yeah that's that's all plan okay so so
an Ann and Scott do you guys have any
problems with the questions to be
submitted to the Secretary of State to
get on the
ballot I don't okay I'm fine these these
revised LS look good okay so I'm gonna
I'm I'm GNA make a motion that
we we uh
authorize the town clerk with the
um um under the direction of the Town
attorney to present these questions to
the Secretary of State to get them put
on our November 2024 town of Andover
ballot a second all right uh any further
discussion all those in favor I I okay
all right right so Dennis um wanted me
to add a word to one of the nine it was
yeah Scott's got it right number nine
budget the word budget the region a
budget vote what other what other votes
do they
take well we don't but all right it's
just a word that will clarify it for a
voter that doesn't have any idea what
region is oh it's gonna make I'm gonna
have
to all right okay so so um we don't have
anything else to do in this in this
meeting uh let me stop sharing go back
to the screen um
and it looks like Linda fish left our
meeting so we don't have anyone from the
public here Eric would you like to make
a comment better to burn out than to
fade away okay and Dennis would you like
to make a comment that I like that song
Eric that's a good song Young anyway um
yeah I no I have no comment I I I
appreciate the support uh from the uh
Board of selectman and the charter
revision commissioner I think you all
did a wonderful job to get to this point
and I'm so glad that these are passed
and we're going to make the deadline
because I would hate to see it all all
this hard work by so many people go to
waste let's let the voters decide thank
you so much all right thank you um thank
Dennis all right I think we're done then
I I'll make a um a motion to adjourn
second it second it all right all those
in favor I all right thank you very much
thank you Eric thank you Dennis and
Scott thank you thank you